---
title: "National Interest Waiver: The Leading Green Card Choice for Professionals"
excerpt: Discover the National Interest Waiver (NIW) application a subcategory
  of the second preference employment-based Green Card EB-2.
category: Immigration
tags:
  - "immigration "
  - permanent residency
  - eb-2
  - NIW
image: /_astro/blogpost4.jpg
publishDate: 2025-06-03T08:26:00.000Z
metadata:
  canonical: https://capitollawpartners.com/national-interest-waiver
  description: Discover how the EB-2 National Interest Waiver (NIW) offers
    professionals a fast path to a Green Card without employer sponsorship by
    proving national interest.
---

The National Interest Waiver (NIW) application is a subcategory of the second preference
employment-based Green Card EB-2. It is a great option for
individuals who have at least an advanced degree or equivalent
education, or for professionals who can demonstrate an exceptional
background in their field of work. This category, which is frequently
preferred by academics, is also a type of Green Card application that
is usually favored by successful professionals, executives, and
entrepreneurs.

This Green Card application is particularly attractive as it allows
individuals to obtain a Green Card without employment, employer
sponsorship, or any application to the Department of Labor. Since
employer sponsorship is not required, there is no need to go through
the PERM (Labor Certification) process, which takes approximately
12–15 months. Furthermore, the NIW allows individuals who currently
hold any legal status in the US to apply directly for the Adjustment
of Status, depending on Green Card quotas. In this respect,
applicants will be entitled to continue staying in the USA legally
and obtain work and travel permits within a short period of time.
Since NIW Green Card applicants can demonstrate that their work has
substantial merit and national importance, the US waives the employer
sponsorship requirement and allows them to receive a Green Card
directly.

We can outline the criteria required to qualify for this Green Card
category into three main groups. The first of these is having
sufficient education or experience.

## Education or Experience

People who want to get a Green Card through this category must have at least a master’s degree or higher. If individuals have a master’s degree or higher in the USA or other countries, this condition will easily be met. In the absence of a master’s degree or any doctoral degree, a bachelor’s degree and at least five years of work experience in the relevant field is considered equivalent to a postgraduate degree. In this scenario, the postgraduate education criteria will be met with undergraduate education and work experience.

The second criterion is that the work or research that is the subject of the Green Card application must be of a nature that can benefit the public or national interests of the USA.

## National Interest - Public Interest

It is a must for this application that the work or research of the NIW Green Card applicant be of sufficient importance and quality to benefit the interests of the USA. However, this criterion should not be interpreted too conservatively. The endeavor in question is not limited to the activities of any particular occupational group. For instance, an engineer’s work on artificial intelligence, a doctor’s work on the treatment of a disease, or an entrepreneur’s contributions to employment could all be considered issues of national or public interest. The important thing here is to demonstrate that the applicants’ efforts can contribute to the national or public interest of the USA.

## Sufficient Contribution

Individuals’ contributions are expected to be significantly greater than those typically encountered in the field. It must be demonstrated in the application that the contributions specified will lead to advancement in the field and contribute to the American economy, health, education, or culture. A good example of this would be a significant amount of employment created by a businessperson that could be deemed critical to American national interests. Applicants will not be required to prove that their endeavor will succeed, but rather that they are equipped to make it succeed if the opportunity arises.

## Where to Apply for the National Interest Waiver?

NIW
Green Card applicants can apply both from within the USA and from
other countries. After the approval of their applications, those in
other countries can go to US consulates and conduct their Green Card
interviews. Applicants in the USA can obtain Green Card status by
submitting an I-485 (Adjustment of Status) form. It is worth noting
that if EB-2 quotas are not backlogged, applicants in the United
States can submit both NIW and I-485 applications at the same time. 


## Family Members of NIW Applicants

Spouses
and unmarried children under the age of 21 of approved NIW applicants
can also apply for admission to the USA. However, while the NIW Green
Card application provides relatively quick access to permanent
residence and a work permit, the preparation process requires serious
work. Given the length of the preparation process, it is helpful for
applicants to make family plans accordingly.

## Premium Processing

NIW
cases are eligible for premium processing. With premium processing,
you can expect a decision on your NIW application within 45 days.
